# HP41-EIGEN
Characteristic equation and eigenvalues for matrix order 2,3,4,5 on the HP41

`EIGEN` computes the characteristic equation and eigenvalues of matrices of order 2, 3, 4, and 5. It computes the coefficients 
of the characteristic polynomial directly, then solves for the roots of the polynomial. Routines from the `MATHSTAT` (or `MATH I`) 
module are used—EIGEN expects that `MATRIX` is run first to enter the matrix elements, then both `DET` (`XROM 01,06`) and `ROOTS` 
(`XROM 01,12`) are called.

Compared to alternate approaches such as Samuelson's formula (see, e.g.,
[Jean-Marc Baillard's program CP](http://www.hpmuseum.org/software/41/41eigv.htm)), computing the polynomial coefficients 
directly for low-order matrices has the advantage of speed at the cost of longer code, at least for order 5 matrices, and 
limited matrix order. Note that the method used by `EIGEN` is in general the *opposite* approach of an algorithm that obtains 
the best numerical accuracy (where the eigenvalues are computed first, then the polynomial coefficients; see Matlab's [POLY 
function](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/poly.html)). However, the accuracy issues associated with computing polynomial coefficients and the 
ill-conditioning of computing polynomial roots are not a concern for very low order matrices—compare Matlab's 
`ROOTS(POLY(1:5))` and `ROOTS(POLY(1:21))`. (And computations for higher order matrices are best done on a computer, if only for 
data entry!)

To load `EIGEN`, first install the `MATHSTAT` (or `MATH I`) module and `XEQ SIZE 090` to allocate sufficient program and memory 
registers. To run `EIGEN`, `XEQ MATRIX` (`MATHSTAT`/`MATH I` module) and enter the matrix elements as prompted. Then `XEQ EIGEN`. The 
coefficients of the characteristic polynomial will first be displayed, then their roots, the eigenvalues. `R/S` through each of 
the displays.

This program is generated by Antonio Lagana's [i41CX+](http://alsoftiphone.com/i41CXplus/) iPhone emulator.
